# Climate Charts

[![Global average temperature estimates for the last 540 million years](img/All_palaeotemps.svg)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:All_palaeotemps.svg)

Above: Global temperature over the last half billion years, on a roughly
logarithmic timescale (more detail closer to the present).

Earth's temperature has mostly been well above the present, with 2 exceptions:
the [Carboniferous period](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carboniferous) about
300 million years ago, and the [Quaternary
period](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quaternary) which began over 2 million
years ago and continues. A quarter billion hot years in between. Humans only
know a world with ice caps.

---

[![Phanerozoic Climate Change](img/Phanerozoic_Climate_Change.svg)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Phanerozoic_Climate_Change.svg)

Above: Global temperature over the last half billion years, on a linear
timescale, with glacial periods shown at the bottom.

---

[![Phanerozoic Carbon Dioxide](img/Phanerozoic_Carbon_Dioxide.png)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Phanerozoic_Carbon_Dioxide.png)

Above: Atmospheric CO₂ in parts per million by volume (ppmv) over the last half
billion years, on a linear timescale.

The datasets vary widely, but they seem to agree there was less CO₂ [about 300
million years ago](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carboniferous), and [since the
Dinosaurs went extinct](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cenozoic), with much
higher CO₂ otherwise.

---

[![Biodiversity during the Phanerozoic](img/Phanerozoic_Biodiversity.svg)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Phanerozoic_Biodiversity.svg)

Above: Biodiversity (in thousands of genera) over the last half billion years,
on a linear timescale.

This shows biodiversity generally increasing, with a lull around the
[Triassic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triassic) roughly 200-250 million
years ago.

---

[![65 Million Years of Climate Change](img/65_Myr_Climate_Change.png)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:65_Myr_Climate_Change.png)

Above: Global temperature since the dinosaurs went extinct, on a linear
timescale.

This shows temperature generally decreasing from a peak about 50 million years
go, with the Antarctic freezing, thawing, and freezing again since.

---

[![Five Million Years of Climate Change From Sediment Cores](img/Five_Myr_Climate_Change.svg)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Five_Myr_Climate_Change.svg)

Above: Global temperature over the last 5 million years, on a linear timescale.

This shows temperature generally decreasing, with rapid oscillations between
warm and cool periods, and the amplitudes increasing (maximum and minimum
temperatures spread farther apart over time).

This timescale is still too large to see recent trends.

---

[![Ice Age Temperature Changes](img/Ice_Age_Temperature.png)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ice_Age_Temperature.png)

Above: Global temperature over the last half million years from 3 different
sources, on a linear timescale.

This shows repeated cycles of freezing, with 5 peaks above the 20th century
global temperature average in the last 450,000 years, the [present
epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holocene) being the most recent peak.

---

[![Post-Glacial Sea Level Rise](img/Post-Glacial_Sea_Level.png)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Post-Glacial_Sea_Level.png)

Above: Sea level in meters (relative to the 20th century average) over the last
20 thousand years, on a linear timescale.

This shows sea level increasing rapidly from 15 to 7 thousand years ago,
leveling out since then.

---

[![2000 Year Temperature Comparison](img/2000_Year_Temperature_Comparison.png)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2000_Year_Temperature_Comparison.png)

Above: Global temperature over the last 2 thousand years, on a linear
timescale.

This shows global temperature mostly flat with a slight bump for the [Medieval
Warm Period](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medieval_Warm_Period) and a dip for
the [Little Ice Age](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Little_Ice_Age), with the
temperature going up steeply in the last century.

---

[![Climate Change Attribution](img/Climate_Change_Attribution.png)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Climate_Change_Attribution.png)

Above: Global temperature change since 1900 CE due to these factors:
[sulfates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stratospheric_sulfur_aerosols),
[volcanoes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_volcanism_on_Earth),
[ozone](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ozone_layer),
[sunshine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milankovitch_cycles), and
[greenhouse gases](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greenhouse_gas).
